# Benchmark of computational tools for taxonomic classification and ecological assessment applied to AGS reactors

Taxonomic identification and ecological assessment are crucial components of most microbiological studies, such as the analysis of Activated Sludge (AS) and Aerobic Granular Sludge (AGS) from waste waters. Nevertheless, the results obtained from these studies have been proven to be deeply influenced by the employed computational frameworks, in terms of sequencing approach, reference database and classifier. The AGS and AS techniques are innovative approaches, that render the depuration of polluted waters in Waste Water Treatment Plants (WWTP) more effective, eco-friendly, money and time-saving. Given all these reasons, to date, the AGS and AS approaches are object of numerous studies, though their optimisation requires accurate, precise and sensitive computational tools.

The primary objective of this project was to compare three untargeted frameworks—Kraken2, riboFrame and Kaiju—in a mock waste water community. To date, Kaiju and Kraken2 are among the most widely employed processing methods for microbiome analyses, while riboFrame stands as a novel pipeline, providing an intermediate perspective between the canonical targeted and untargeted approaches. The secondary objective was to validate the obtained results in real AGS samples and to include the 16S targeted approach (QIIME2) in the analysis. To meet these aims, we compared the performances of the aforementioned pipelines both in terms of taxonomic identification and ecological assessment. 

The main findings from the mock, showed that Kaiju stands as the best computational framework, both in taxonomic identification and assessment of the beta diversity, followed by riboFrame and lastly by Kraken2; while riboFrame provided the best results in terms of alpha diversity. The outcomes deriving from the analysis of the waste water samples mainly validated the results obtained from the mock. Nevertheless, the overall findings demonstrated the high risk of misclassification, possibly hindering future developments in this field.
